OCR of paper; see pdf file noether-realiz.pdf for viewwable/printable page

Reprinted from JOURNAL OF COMPUTER AND SYSTEM SCIENCES Vol. 18, No. 1. February 1979
All Rights Reserved by Academic Press. New York 4nd London PrinUd in Be4euvv
On the Existence of Minimal Realizations of Linear Dynamical
Systems over Noetherian Integral Dornains*
YVEs RoUCIIALEAU
Centre de Alath~niatiques Appliqu&s, E.N.S. Mines de Paris, F-06560 Valbonne, France
AND
EDUARDO D. SONTAG
Rutgers University, Department of Math enza tics, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903
Received June 15, 1977; revised March 22, 1978
This paper studies the problem of obtaining minimal realizations of linear input/output
maps defined over rings. In particular, it is shown that, contrary to the case of systems over
fields, it is in general impossible to obtain realizations whose dimiension equals the rank of
the Hankel matrix. A characterization is given of those (Noetherian) rings over which
realizations of such dimensions can he always obtained, and the result is applied to delay-
differential systems.
A. INTRODUCTION
A linear, discrete-time, constant, dynamical system Z over an integral domain R is
defined by giving a finitely generated torsionfree R-module X (the state module) and a
triplet of R-honiomorphisms (F, G, H), where
F: X --* X, G: R", --)- X, H: X -->- R-.
We call the free R-module R- the input module, R" the output module, and write the
equations of the system
xt+l = Fx, + Gut t C Z'
yt+l ~ Hxt+l ,
where ut (the input at time t) belongs to R"', x, (the state at time t) to X and y, (the output
at time 0 to RP.
It follows from the linearity of these equations that the relation they induce between
* This research was supported in part by U.S. Army Research Grant DAH C04-74-G-01 53 and
U.S. Air Force Grant AFOSR72-2268 through the Center for Mathematical System Theory,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Fla. 32611.
65
0022-OOW/79/010065-11$02.00/0
Copyright Cc) 1979 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
66 ROUCHALFAU AND SONTAG
inputs and outputs is completely characterized by the infinite sequence of p x m
R-matrices S - (A, , A, _.) (the inputloutput sequence of the system) where A, is the
matrix representation of the R-homomorphism UP IG: R111 ~ RP in the standard bases
of R and RP. Conversely, given a sequence of p - "i R-matrices S - (A, , A, _.), the
realization problem consists in finding a finitely generated torsion-free R-module X and
three R-homomorphisms (F. G, II) as above such that A, --- HF'--'G, for all t ---- 0.
Suppose that X can be generated as an R-module bv n elements; then we can represent
the homomorphisms F, G, 11 (not necessarily uniquel_y) by R-matrices with respect to the
standard bases of R and RP and the set of generators. We shall from now on not make any
distinction between the homomorphisms and their chosen matrix representations. If r
is the smallest cardinalitv for a set of generators of X, we shall call r the dimension of the
svstem over R.
When R is a field, the realization problem is completely solved. It is shown in Kalman,
Falb, and Arbib [5] that an input/output sequence can be realized by a fi nite- dimensional
svsteni Iff its associated behavior matrix
(~l -42 A3 ...
B '42 -4:3 ~14
has finite rank n, that n is the minimal dimension for a realization of the sequence, and that
a system realizing the sequence has minimal dimension iff it is canonical, i.e. both reachable
(the map (G, FG,..., Fn 1G): Rnm --->- X is onto) and observable (the map (H', FH ......
(F)1~ IIF)': X ~ R" is one-to-one). An algorithm is also given to construct such a
minimal realization.
When R is not a field, it was first shown in Rouchalcau, Wyman, and Kalman [10] that,
under fairly general conditions on R, the criterion for the existence of a realization is
exactIv the same as above, namely that the behavior matrix have finite rank (an up-to-date
summary of these existence results is given in Section B of this paper). That paper did
not consider the question of the minimal dimension of realizations. Such a concept of
course is easv to define: a realizable input!output sequence S (which therefore has a
behavior matrix of finite rank) can be realized by linear systems of finite dimension; a
minimal realization of S over R will be one, the dimension of which is smaller than that
of any other realization of S. It, of course, always exists but is not equivalent any more to
the notion of canonical realization; its dimension may be larger than the rank of the
behavior matrix, and is not in general easily determined from inputloutput data.
The purpose of the present paper will be to study a more restrictive and stronger
version of minimality. Instead of asking, as in the a aformentioned paper (Rouchaleau,
Wyman, and Kalman [10]):
"When does an R-Input~output sequence S realizable over the quotient field K of R
also have a realization over R ?", we shall ask:
"When does S have an R-realization which has the same dimension as a minimal
realization over K;".
Since R is assumed to be an integral domain, we may consider its quotient field K. To a
system (X, F, G, H) over R we may associate a system (X OX R K, F OR K, G OR K,
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
LINEAR DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS OVER NOETHERIAN INTEGRAL DOMAINS 67
H K) over K which has the same input Toutput sequence of R-matrices. Furthermore,
It is clear that if the system over R is canonical, then so is the associated system over K.
Since the R-sequence S -- (Al , A, ...) is a fortiori a K-sequence, we can find a realization
for it over K-1 the system (.Y ';)R K, F (1)1? K, G xll? K, 11 (X,), K) is an example of such a
realization. To determine a minimal realization for the R-sequence S over K is a solved
problem. We are thus led to the follov,-mg
(1.1) DEFINITION. A realization (-V, F, G, 11) of a sequence S over R is called
absolutely minimal iff its dimension is the same as that of a minimal realization of S over
the quotient field K.
(1.2) Remark. This definition is equivalent to requesting that the system over K
defined by the matrices F, G, H be canonical. An absolutclv minimal realization remains
minimal under any ring extension of R.
(1.3) LEMMA. The state module X of an absolutely minimal systein Z is free. Z is
observable and weakly reachable (i.e., rank, (G,FG_.,1,'11 1G) ~ n, dimension of the
system), and converseIV an observable and weahlY reachable system i's absolutelv minimal.
Proof. The n generators of X as an R-module are also generators of X R K as a
K-vector space. If tbey are not linearly independent, the dimension of X (111? K is less
than n, contradicting minimality over K.
If the svstern were not observable, there VMUld be a state x -/ 0 in X such that
x'(J1Y1l' - - - (F') " - 1 HT - 0;
but this would a fortiori mean that there is a state x / 0 in X r`~,)~ K which is unobservable
for the system (X Q,,, K, F, G, H) over K, contradicting its canonicity.
The proof of the converse is just as trivial. I
The aim of this paper is to characterize those rings R over which any realizable mput/
output sequence can have an absolutely minimal realization. The interest of such a
characterization is two-fold. First, it will tell Lis exactly when we do not lose anything
(from the point of View of dimension) by realizing an input,foutput sequence over the ring
R rather than over an overfield of R. Second, one of the motivations for studying SN-stems
over rings is their use in modeling delay-differential systems (c.f. Kamen [6]). In this case
the rings under consideration are polynomial rings; a sufficient condition for the point-,vise
controllability of delay- di fferen tial systems is that the associated ring model be veakly
reachable (see Sontag [12, Section 5]). Furthermore (as pointed out to the authors by
E. Kamen) only for absolutely minimal realizations can internal stability be deduced
from external (bounded inputlbounded Output) stability. So it is important to know the
polynomial rings over which this condition is ahAavs true.
After having reviewed in Section B of this paper the conditions under which a realiza-
tion exists, Nve shall study the problem of ahS01LJtelV minimal realizations. We shall see in
c
ection C that, for single input systems, canonical realizations are absolutely minimal over
S
very general rings. Section D shows that for general multivariable systems this verv nice
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
68 ROUCHALFAU AND SONTAG
property holds only over principal- I dea I domains; we then give an algorithill for con-
structing such a canonical, absolutely minimal realization. In Section E, we shall give a
condition guaranteeing the existence of absolutely minimal realizations; specializing the
result to the case of polynomial rings, we shall find that only those in one or two variables
sati-fv the condition.
13. SURVEY OF THE CONDITIONS UNDiR Nviucii REALIZATION-, ]EXIST OVER A RING
The fact that
(2.1) THEORP0. An inputloutput sequence S of inatrices over a Noetherian domain R
is realizable over R iff it is realizable over the quotient field K of R.
was first established by Rouchalcau, Wvman, and Kalman [10]. To make the paper self
contained, we shall now giN,e a simple proof of this result.
It is well-known (see, for instance, Sontag [12, Lemma (3.1)1) that an input,routput
sequence S is realizable (whether over a field or over a ring) iff the (infinite) columns of its
beha6or Triatrix
B ~1, A:, -44 ...
mav he written as linear combinations of a finite subset of columns; in other words, iff
the columns of B generate a finitelv generated module X. We can then obtain a canonical
realization as follows: take X as state module; consider the shift operator on X defined by
s k
s
ending each column of B to the column occupying the same position in the next bloc
col Unin ~ it extends to a well defined module endomorphism F of X because of the Hankel
pattern of B-, define a linear transformation G: R- --). X bv mapping thejth standard basis
vector of R into thejth clementary column of B; finally, define H: X ~ RP bv taking as
the Image of any column of B the vector composed of the first p elements of that column
(in other ~~ ords, the intersection of the column with the first block row). Then (X, F, G, H)
is a canonical realization of
Let us now assume that the R-sequence,5 is realizable over K, and assume that vj Vn
arc a set of basis columns for B over K. Then anv column v of B can be written as
11
v Y v, j(v) u K.
2-1
The cocfficients Ai(v) in this linear dependence can be obtained using Cramer's formulas
-&Z-) JIM J, (v), J c R.
j
Both these determinants, composed bv additions and multiplications from elements of R,
belong to R.
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
LINEAR DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS OVER NOETHERIAN INTEGRAL DOMAINS 69
Dcfine no,,v u, - vj~'J. We have, for any column v of B,
n
v -- y Jj(7) iii, J i(v) e R,
i=1
hence the R-module generated by the columns v of B is contained in the R-module
generated by ii, _., u. . Since "Noetherian" is equivalent to "every submodule of a
finitely generated module is finitely generated", the theorem follows.
If -,vcre lax the Noetherian assumption, then we can use the following result of
Cahen and Chabert [16]:
(2.2) 141sui,,r. Let R be completely integrall -y closed and K its quotient field. Then an
I.itputioutput sequence ~~ of R-matrice;is realizable over R whenever S is realizable over K.
Furthermore, the monic recurrence relation of S of minimal degree over K has all of its coeffi-
cients in R.
Proof. See Eilenberg [3, Chap. XVI, Theorem 12.2].
But it has been shown (Rouchaleau, Kalman, and Wyman [10]) that an R-sequence is
realizable over R whenevei it is realizable over the integral closure R of R. Hence we have:
(2.3) RESULT. If the integral closure R? of a ring R is completely integrally closed, then an
R-sequence i's realizable over R iff it is realizable over the quotient field K of R.
A slightly less general result was proved by Rouchaleau and Wyman [11], using a
generalization of classical stability theory. Extensions to reduced rings can be found in
Rouchalcau [9].
C. SINGLE-1NPuT OR SINGLE-OuTt,irr SYSTEMS
Let S be such that in - 1, p being an arbitrary finite integer. It is well known that the
existence of a realization is linked to that of a monic recurrence relation between the
elements of .;. We have precisely.
(3.1) LFm,-vlA. If an input/output sequence S with in -- I satisfies a monic recurrence
relation over R of degree n, then S has a realization of dimension n over R.
Proof. Assume that aAk A,Ak ~n-l '-Ik-,n 0 for all k > 0, with ii c- R
for all 1'. Then the R-matrices
0 0 0 ... 0
1 0 0 ... 0 0
0 1 0 ... 0 0
F G 11 ~ (A, -4, A
(0 0 0 ... I - (0)
0 0 0 ... 0 0
together with the state module Rn constitute a realization of size n.
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
70 ROUCHALEAU AND SONTAG
(3.2) LEMMA' ' If the domain R i's integrally closed and the inputloutput sequence S is
realizable over R, then its monic recurrence polynomial of minimal degree over the quotient
field of R has all of its coefficients in R.
Proof. Since S is realizable over R, it satisfies a monic recurrence relation with
coefficients in R (given, for example, by the characteristic polynomial h(z) of F in one of its
realizations). If we now view S as a sequence over K, the set of recurrence polynomials
of S is an ideal j in K[z] (nonempty, since j contains h(z)). This ideal is principal, hence
has a monic gencratorf(z), the monic recurrence polynomial of minimal degree of S over
K. Thus we have:
h(z) = g(z) f (z), h(z) monic in R[z], f [z] monic in K[z].
This is the exact setup of Zarlski and Samuel [Vol. 1, Chap. V, Sect. 3, Theorem 51, and
it follows from the integral closure of R that f (z) is in R[z]. I
Assume then that our input/output sequence S has a minimal realization over K of
dimension n and that S is realizable over R. This means that the associated behavior
matrix B(S) has rank n (see for example Kalman, Falb, and Arbib [5, Chap. 10]), hence
that the first n + I columns of B(S) are linearly dependent. Then there is a recurrence
relation of degree n over K between the elements (in the present case, vectors) of the
input/output sequence. If R is integrally closed, it follows from (3.2) that, there is a monic
recurrence relation of degree <n over R. By (3.1), there is an R-realization Zof dimension
n. Since a realization with coefficients in _R is a fortiori one with coefficients in K and
the dimension of a minimal realization over K is n, this R-realization Z must have
dimension exactly n. Furthermore, the realization constructed in (3.1) is reachable (the
columns of G, FG,..., F-1 G generate R11) and observable. We have therefore proved
(3.3) PROPOSITION. An R-realizable inputloutput sequence with ni ~ I over an integrally
closed domain R has an R-realization which is both canonical and absolutely minimal.
The argument is very similar in the case of single-output systems. The n-dimensional
realization associated with the recurrence of degree n is now given by
0 1 0 ... 0 A,
0 0 1 ... 0 A2
F G H ~ (1 0 ... 0)
0 0 0 ... I An-1
-'n -on-1 -Cn-2 *** -A, A I
Rn being the state module. Thus we have
(34) PROPOSITION. An R-realizable input loutput sequence with p ~~ I over an integrally
closed domain has an R-realization which i's absolutely minimal and observable but not
necessarily reachable.
,Fo see that all realizations like in (3.4) are not necessarily reachable, assume that R
is not a principal ideal domain and let oi, fl c R generate a nonprincipal proper ideal j of R.
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
LINEAR DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS OVER NOETHERIAN INTEGRAL DOMAINS 71
Then the input/output sequence A, - - (A g) - - A, -- - - - is realized minimally over R by
F ~ 1, G - (a 0), H ~ 1. If we take R as a state module, then this absolutely minimal
realization is not reachable since J is proper. A canonical realization would have a state
module isomorphic to J (which is non principal) hence its dimension would be 2, and it
would not be absolutely minimal.
The dual of such a realization, on the other hand, is canonical. We have here an example
of a "strongly observable" system (see Sontag [14]), as well as a breakdown of the fact that
the dual of a canonical system over K field is canonical.
(3.5) Remark. If we assume that R is not Just integrally closed but even completely
integrally closed (for example, if it is integrally closed and Noetherian) then we need
assume only in (3.3) and (3.4) that the input,~output sequence S has a minimal realization
of dimension n over K. That it is R-realizable follow directly from (2.2).
Let us now consider the general mulfivariable case.
D. WHEN ARF CANONwAi. RFALIZATIONS ALso R-'\IININTAI,?
The answer to this question for Multi-input, multi-output systems is very simple.
(4.1) PROPOSITION. The canonical realization of ever -v inputioutput sequence S over a
Noetherian domain R is absolutelY minimal if and on/Y if R i's a principal-ideal domain.
Proof. Sufficiency. Let X be the state module of a canonical realization (X, F, G, H)
of the sequence S; it is by definition finitely generated and torsion free. Since R is a princi-
pal ideal domain, X is a free module. Let dim X n. Consider the associated K-system,
(X K, F (~~)R K, G (~X,'~R K, H (/), K). Its state space X CX R K has the same dimension
n (as a K-vector space) as X (as an R-module) since X is free. As was pointed out in the
introduction, this associated K-system is canonical since the original R-system was. So n
is the dimension of a minimal realization of S over K. The system (X, F, G, H) is therefore
necessarily an absolutely minimal realization of S.
Necessity. Let us first establish the general fact, of interest by itself, that any finitely
generated torsion-free module X may be the state module of a canonical svstern. Since X
is finitely generated, with, say, in generators, there is a projection
R"' U ~ X -- 0.
Since X is finitely generated, torsion-free, and the rings we are considering are integral
domains, there is also an injection, for some p,
0 - - ~ A'-', RP.
(see Rotman [8, Theorem 4.21]). So (X,F, G, H), A,Itli X as a state module and with
F - identify, G ~ u, H - - v, is a canonical system.
It was pointed out in the Introduction (Lernma 1.3) that the state module of an
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
72 ROUCHALEAU AND SONTAG
absolutely minimal realization is alwavs free. So if the state module of any canonical
system is R-minimal, then any finitely generated, torsion free-module is free. But this,
together with the Noetherian assumption, implies that R is a principal ideal domain. I
We shall give an algorithm for constructing such a canonical realization. First we
ascertain the rank of the behavior matrix B(S) (which can be done over any field containing
R, using the rank condition of Kalman, Falb, and Arbib [5, Chap. 10, Condition 11.231).
Then we find a nonsingular submatrix (1) of maximal rank, sav n, and a basis over R for
B,,.,, (the submatrix of B(S) consisting of the first n block rows and columns of the
behavior matrix). This can be done in the following way.
(i) Let 1, be the submatrix of B,,,, containing the rows of op, and a, the L~reatest
common divisor of the elements in the first row of B,,,,, . Call x1 the linear combination of
the columns of L having a, as its leading coefficient.
(ii) Subtract from every column x of L a multiple of x, a(x)x, (x(x) in R) such that
the first clernent of x - cx(x)xi be 0. This is possible by definition of a, . We get a next
matrix Li with zero top row, and such that its columns together with x, still generate the
colunins of L.
(iii) We apply the same procedure to the second row of L, , obtaining x, and L, ,
etc... . At the end of the process, we shall have a basis made up of vectors (x . ..... X.) -
Let F be the n x m submatrix of L having its columns in the first block columns and A
the p 'X n submatrix of B,, corresponding to the columns of 0 and the first block row.
Thcri NNc can write out a realization (theso-called Silverman realization):
F - (X . ..... NJ (70) 0- I(x . ..... X,,),
G (x1 x,J 'F,
H - /l (P I (v . ..... X,J,
\%here cy designates the shift operator.
The matrix (X, I ... I x,,), beings lower triangular, is easy to invert. As to 0, its inverse is
a byproduct of the determination of the rank of the behavior matrix.
E. NVHPN CAN WE GUARANTEE THE EXISTENCE OF AN
ABSOLUTELY MINIMM. REALIZATION?
We have just seen that we cannot expect every canonical multivariable svstern to be
also absolutely minimal, unless the ring is a principal ideal domain. If, however, we are
willing to consider absolutely minimal systems which may not be canonical, then we can
guarantee their existence over more general rings. These are given exactly by the following
(5.1) THEOREM. EverY realizable input!" output sequence S over a Noetherian ring R has
an absoluteh, minitnal realization iff everY finitelY generated reflexive module over R is free.
Proof. lVecessitY. Let X be the state module of a canonical realization of ~; over R and
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
LINEAR DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS OVER NOETHERIAN INTE.GRAL DOMAINS 73
M t lie state module of an absolutely minimal realization of '~. By Leninia (1.3) an absolu-
tely inininial realization is always observable, hence Zelgcr's lemma (see Kalman, Falb,
an I I
, d Arbib [5, Chap. 10. Lemma 6.2]) Implies the existence of an injection X , W. Also,
bv definition of a minimal realization, 11 '~)R K is the state space of a canonical realization
of .'~ ox er K. So 11 K is isomorphic with X I , K. Thus we have, up to isomorphism,
X C 31 ~- X , , K, where M is free (Leturna (1.3)).
We are exactly in the situation described by Bourbaki [2, Sect. 4, No. 1, Corollaire de la
Proposition 1], and both ]?-modules X and .1I are "r6seaux" of the K-vector space
X R K, .1I being furthermore free and containing X. As is i )inted out in the above
rcf'cr(-n((, (Proposition 3, (IN') and Remark 3), Hom,(.11, R) C lJorn,(X, R), that 1s,
let A he a finitely generated, torsion-frec module over R. Its dual X- is finitely
generated ,,Iiicc R is Noctherian. Ixt ~,u . ..... u,,; be generators of X'. We may construct
'I calmnical ~,-~stcin Zoo , -'Nith state module Xas follows. We choose the number of inputs 11
and the niatrl.\ G as in the proof of (4.1), take for F the identlt%- matrix and dcfine
11: X - ~ R" in such a way that Its p rows are gi~ en b~ the functions [u . ..... UJ-
Suppose the system Z, has an absolutely minimal rtalization .17, - (31, P, G, 1Y). By
the first paragraph of the proof, XC 11. So the inap 1/: A'- R1, extends to a inap
fl: J I - - l?". Since in the system .1',, the ro,~vs of 11 generate X, the generators of X'
extend to lincar inaps 11 - R. So X' C 11'. It follo-,vs that M' A". Consequentl\
if A I's -Cflcxl\cl then X M and so X is free.
Nlofficlenr.i% Assume that (X, F, G, II) is a canonical system. X is therefore of finite
tvpc, hence a 'Wseau" of X (1)R K (see Bourbaki [2, Sect. 4, No. 1, Proposition 11). It
follo\N s that X` and X- ' are reflexive (Bourbaki [2, Sect. 4, No. 2, comments following
Th~OFCTIIC 11). SA) .\'and X* * have the saine dual, and the map H: X -, RP may be viewed
as a inap If- ': X*'* --, R". The map I,': X - X canonically induces a map F*: X*- - V-".
N\ hich in turn canonicallv induces F* ': X- X". Hence a system (X, F, G, H)
canoincall.\ induces a system .1" - (X*-, F", G, [I**) having the same inputloutput
inap. Since X" is reflexive, is free hv assumption. But -V'- is a free "r6scau" of
X K (13ourbaki [2, Sect. 4, No. 2, COTrllllCntS preceeding Theorem 11), hence
dim, X- dlul,(A', , K) (BOUrbaki [2, Sect. 4, No. 1, ExaMple 2]). X K being
the state space of a canonical realization over K, !:' ' is an absolutelv minimal realization.
(5.2) Remark. Absolutcly minimal realizations are not necessarily unique. In fact,
thev areasubclass of the lattice of minimal-rank realizations, studied in Sontag [13]. When
R is a pi incipal-deal domain, this subclass coincides with the entire lattice.
NVe have thus obtained an abstract characterization of those rings over which absolutely
mininial realizations alwaNs exist. We ,,hall now show that among rings ofpolvnomials over a
field onli, those in one or two indeterminates meet the condition of Theorem (5. 1). (The case of
one indeterminate has already been treated in the previous section).
(5.3) LEM-MA. Ever_v finitely, generated refleviTe R-module is projective ~ff the global
d7mension of R is inferior or equal to 2.
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
74 ROUCHALEAV AND SONTAG
Proof. This result - - - due to Bass - - - may be found in Faith [4].
(5.4) LEMMA. If R is a ring of poij,nomials in two unknowns over a field, then everv
projective module of finite t3pe over R isfiree.
Proof. See Bass [1, Part 11, Chap. 4, Sect. 6].
Hilbert's theorem on syzygics implies that the global dimension of a polynomial ring in
n unknowns is n (see for example, Kaplanski [7, Part 111, Theorem 7]). This and the last
two lemmas show that our claim is true.
Observation. A counterexample for the case of polynomials in three variables over a
field K (R K[x, Y, z]) is given bv the following inputloutput map with m - 3, 3.
0 0
__ (0
-0),
Z -4, - ~43 0 0 0
0 X, 0 0 0)
Although rank B - 2, there exists no R-realization of dimension 2. Indeed, the canonical
state module X is isomorphic to the column space of .4, , and this module can be proven to
be reflexive but not free.
In view of (5.3), the general problern of deciding if a given R satisfies the condition of
(5.1) breaks down into the subproblems: (i) determine if global dim R ~~ 2 (easy) and (ii)
decide if finitely generated projectives over R are necessarily free. This latter problem is
very difficult, but is currently an important research area in commutative algebra (viz.
"Serre's conjecture", etc.).
Returning to the case of delay- dl ffe rential systems mentioned in the Introduction, we
deduce from (5.1), (5.2) and (5.4) that only up to two rationally independent delays may be
in general allowed if realizations of the "right" dimensions are to exist.
F. CONCLUSION
lVe have shown under exactly what conditions we can realize an Input/output sequence
over a ring with matrices over the same ring without losing any of the nice properties
guaranteed by classical realization theorv over a field. Admittedly, the class of rings thus
characterized I- rather narrow; however, it does contain, besides principal-ideal domains,
polynOTIlial rings in two indeterminates (which have applications in the theorv of linear
delay-differential systems studied by Kamen [6]).
It is possible to give an upper bound on the increase in size due to the choice of a
canonical realization (see Swan [15]). In particular, over a Dedekind ring, it can be shown
that this bound is equal to I (Bourbaki [2, Chap. 7, Sect. 4, No. 9, Theorem 6]). In fact,
the first example of a canonical, vet nonminimal system was given to the authors by
Professor B. F. Wyman using a Dedeking ring.
<<PAGE-DIVIDER>>
LINEAR DYNAMICAL SY~,TEMS OVER NOETHERIAN INTEGRAL DOMAINS 75
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The ;lUtbors are very grateful to Professor R. E. Kalman for his numerous suggestions and
comments during the writing of this paper.
REFERENCES
I .11. BASS, "Algebraic K-Thcory," Benjamin, New York, 1968.
2. N. BOURBAKI, "Alg~hre Commutative," Chap. 7, Diviseurs, Herm~,nn, Paris, 1965.
3. S. "Automata, Languages, and Machines," Vol. A, Academic Press, New York,
1974.
4. C. ]"All If, "Rings, Modules, and Categories," Springer-Verlag, New York/Berlin, 1973.
5. R. E. KAL-MAN, 1'. L. FALB, AND M. A. ARBIB, "Topics in Mathematical System Theory,"
McG I a\% -Hill, New York, 1969.
6. E- W. KANIEN, An algebraic theory of systems defined by convolution operators, j. Math.
S1,stein Theo?jy 9 (1975), 57-74.
1. KAPLANSKI, "Fields and Rings," Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1969.
8. J. J. Ro'r',IAN, "Notes on Homological Algebra," Van Nostrand-Reinhold, Princeton, N.J.,
1970.
9. Y. ROUCHALEAIT, "Linear, discrete-time, finite-Llimensional, dynamical systems over some
classes Of Commutative rings," Ph.D. Thebis, Stanford University, 1972.
10. Y. ROUCHALFAl-, B. F. WYNIAN, AND R. E. KAL.MAN, Algebraic structure of linear dynamical
systems. 111. Realization theory over a commutative ring, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 69 (1972),
2404-2406.
11. Y. ROU( HALEAU AND B. F. WYMAN, Linear dynamical systems over integral domains, J. Comput.
System Sci. 9 (1974), 129-142.
12. E. 1). SONTAG, Linear systems over commutative rings: A survey, Ricerche Automatica 7 (1976),
1-34.
13. E. 1). SON FAG, The lattice of minimal realizations of response maps over rings, Math. Systems
Theory 11 (1977), 169-175.
14. E. 1). SONTAG, On split realizations of response maps over rings, Inform. Contr. 37(1978),
23-33.
15. R. G. SWAN, The number of generators of a module, Math. Z. 102 (1967), 318-322.
16. P. J. CAHEN AND J. L. CHABFRT, 1~16rnents quasi-entiers et extensions de Fatou, J. Algebra 36
(1975), 185-192.
Printed by the St Catherine Press Ltd., Tempelhof 37, Bruges, Belgium.
