Short Vita for E.Sontag

Eduardo Sontag's major current research interests lie in several
areas of control theory and foundations of learning and neural networks.

He received his Licenciado degree (Mathematics) from the University of Buenos
Aires in 1972, and his Ph.D. (Mathematics) under Rudolf E. Kalman at the
Center for Mathematical Systems Theory, University of Florida, in 1976.

Since 1977, Dr. Sontag has been with the Department of Mathematics
at Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, where he is
currently Professor II of Mathematics as well as a Member of the
Graduate Faculties of the Department of Computer Science and of
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering.  He is also
the Director of the Rutgers Center for Systems and Control.

Sontag has authored about two hundred journal and conference papers and
book chapters in the above areas, as well as the books
"Topics in Artificial Intelligence" (in Spanish, Buenos Aires:
Prolam, 1972), "Polynomial Response Maps" (Berlin: Springer, 1979),
and "Mathematical Control Theory: Deterministic Finite Dimensional
Systems" (Texts in Applied Mathematics, Volume 6, New York:
Springer, 1990).  His industrial experience includes consulting
for Bell Laboratories and Siemens.

Among recent or upcoming presentations are an hour Plenary Talk
at the 1995 SIAM Control Conference, a 45-minute Invited Lecture
at the 1994 International Congress of Mathematicians, a 3hr Mini-Course
at the 1993 European Control Conference, hour plenaries at the
1993 Jerusalem Conference on Control Theory and Applications and at the
1992 IFAC Conference on Nonlinear Control, and two plenary talks
at the 1995 Neural Information Processing Conference, 
He is or has been an Associate Editor for various journals, including:
Systems and Control Letters, IEEE Transactions in Automatic Control,
Control-Theory and Advanced Technology, SMAI-COCOV, Dynamics and Control,
Journal of Computer and Systems Sciences, Neurocomputing, and Neural Networks.
In addition, he is a co-founder and co-Managing Editor of the
Springer journal Mathematics of Control, Signals, and Systems.

Sontag is an IEEE Fellow, and has been Program Director and
Vice-Chair of the Activity Group in Control and Systems Theory of
the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.  He has been a
member of several committees at SIAM and the American Mathematical
Society, and is a former Chair of the Committee on Human Rights of
Mathematicians of the latter.  He is listed in "Who's Who in Frontier
Science and Technology" and in "American Men and Women of Science".

Recently supervised Ph.D. students have been:
Yuan Wang (Math, 1990), Yuandan Lin (Math, 1992),
Francesca Albertini (Math, 1993), Hava Siegelmann (CS, 1993),
and Renee Koplon (Math, 1994).
