[adapted from bellman nomination]


A research highlights narrative

Perhaps the best-known contributions of Sontag's control theory work are the
notions of input-to-state stability (ISS) and control Lyapunov functions
(cLf's). These notions have been employed in tens of thousands of papers by
other authors and dozens of books, in both further theoretical developments
and applications.

Prior to the 1989 introduction of ISS, two main streams of nonlinear systems
theory remained disjoint: while classical Lyapunov stability theory dealt with
state space models, with a very limited capability to incorporate
disturbances, Sandberg-Zames input-output theory --more suitable to
engineering needs-- was unable to benefit from rich insights gained by
Lyapunov theory.  Thus, responses to inputs and responses to initial
conditions existed in separate control theory "universes". The new notion of
ISS seamlessly integrated Lyapunov and I/O theory.  The first first paper was
followed with at least a decade of further theoretical advances, and in the
hands of control design-oriented researchers ISS became a tool for synthesis
of control algorithms robust to disturbances and unmodeled dynamics.

Non-smooth cLf's were introduced by Sontag in 1981 (Arstein soon after
developed the idea of smooth cLf's), as well as the "universal formula" for
stabilization. These notions allowed Lyapunov functions to be applied as a
control synthesis tool, and not merely an analysis tool, through innovations
(by other authors) such as backstepping, then forwarding, and inverse optimal
control, "safe control", control barrier functions, and "safeguards", which
have been key to areas ranging from stable biped walking to automated and
driverless cars.

In other work, starting with his PhD thesis, Sontag developed the foundations
of observability, identifiability, and realizations of discrete-time (and
later continuous-time) algebraic nonlinear systems, based in the idea of
studying the dual adjoint dynamics on "system observables". This work was the
subject of his Invited Address to the 1994 International Congress of
Mathematicians.

Following on the work of Kalman and coauthors, Sontag made some of the most
significant advances to linear systems over rings, in which the entries of the
systems matrices (A,B,C) belong to rings of operators (useful in studying the
stabilization of delay differential systems), integers (no-roundoff), or
polynomial functions of parameters (useful in the stabilization of
parametrized families of systems).  For example his 1982 paper (with
Khargonekar) [4a] presented the first state space formulas for stable proper
coprime factorizations, required for controller parameterization in the
Desoer-Youla-Vidyasagar sense, framed naturally in the language of
systems over rings.  

With his Rutgers colleague Sussmann, in a 1980 CDC paper Sontag showed that it
is not possible to stabilize every controllable system by continuous
feedback. He thus demonstrated that aiming for results that replicate those in
linear control theory might produce feedback laws without
noise-robustness. But they also showed that time-periodic feedback
stabilization is possible, at least in dimension one, which Coron subsequently
greatly extended. Sontag then developed a whole line of research on
stabilization by discontinuous feedback, in which a particularly remarkable
achievement is the TAC paper that showed that every (asymptotically)
controllable system can be stabilized by discontinuous feedback.

Another direction largely initiated by Sontag and Sussmann was stabilization
of linear systems by bounded feedback; a first paper announced the problem's
full solution but with a construction that was not practically
implementable. Teel improved their work with a brillant approach with nested
saturations, for the chain of integrators.  In turn, Sontag and Sussmann
extended that construction to the general case, and Sontag and students went
on to prove additional robustness and ISS properties of these designs.

Sontag was also a pioneer in the now-popular field of hybrid systems.  His
1980 paper on piecewise linear systems showed their power as
controllers, combining continuous variables and discrete mathematics and
computer science ideas towards the development of a comprehensive approach to
the regulation of nonlinear systems.

In the late 1980s, Sontag started the study of computational complexity in
nonlinear control. He proved that deciding nonlinear controllability for
bilinear systems is NP-hard, a fundamental limitation not expected at that
time, thus establishing that the search for efficiently testable necessary and
sufficient conditions (an area of great activity at the time) could not
possibly succeed. 

Sontag’s interest in neural networks (already evident in an Artificial
Intelligence book that he published as an undergraduate) culminated in the
1990s in his examination of the foundations of feedforward and recurrent
neural networks and more generally computational learning theory; he
provided the first results on the sample complexity and VC dimension of analog
neural networks. A remarkable paper showed that what are now called "deep
neural networks" are necessary to stabilize non-holonomic systems, which was
surprising given the focus on single hidden layer architectures for control at
the time.  Going further, he developed a theory of analog computing
(with his student Siegelmann), showing that even analog computers would not be
able to solve certain computational problems unless a condition similar to
"P=NP" would hold.  Many of these papers were accepted for presentation at the
most selective computer science conferences (FOCS, STOC, COLT, NIPS). 

During the last 20 years, Sontag has been inspired by systems biology and has
been one of the pioneers in advancing that field using control
theory. Feedback is as central to living systems as it is in engineering, from
homeostatic mechanisms for temperature, pressure, or chemical levels, to the
delicate interactions between infections, tumors, and the immune system. In
contrast to engineering systems governed by physical laws understood at least
a century ago, the feedback models in biology contain substantial uncertainty
and noise -- the very things that living organisms overcome to survive.
Sontag has focused on understanding what is special about biological control
systems.  His analysis of biological
problems led to the discovery of fundamental new concepts in control theory,
subsequently applied in other fields.  In a 2001 paper,
he showed how stability of a popular model of immune cell activation could be
established by using chemical reaction network (CRN) theory, in the process
extending certain  stability proofs of CNR theory from local to global and
quantifying robustness properties.  In a long line of very successful
collaborations with Angeli and others, Sontag vastly expanded the
knowledge of dynamics of biochemical networks, which has been followed up by
the efforts of a large community.  Also with Angeli, and again motivated by
biological signaling networks, Sontag introduced in a 2004 paper the idea
of monotone systems with inputs, in the process advancing the
classical results by Hirsch, Smith, Smale, and others in mathematics.  The
introduction of inputs (and outputs) made possible the analysis of large
systems through decomposition into smaller monotone subsystems, for example,
through new small-gain theorems (different than those for ISS), an
approach that would have been impossible if considering only classical
isolated dynamical systems.  This work led to an explosion of interest by the
control community in monotone systems (as evidenced by citations), and systems
decomposable into monotone systems, with applications much beyond the original
biological motivations.  There are many topics not mentioned in this
narrative, including Sontag’s contributions to immune system modeling and
analysis, the design of optimal control in chemotherapy, which balances damage
to the immune system, and especially his work on synthetic biology.

